About 300 members and supporters of Reclaim The City, gathered at Queen’s Park High School in Woodstock on Thursday, Women’s Day. This was Reclaim the City’s first annual congress. This is the organisation that organised the occupations of Woodstock Hospital and Helen Bowden Nursing Home opposite Cape Town’s Waterfront. Both properties, owned by the Western Cape government, were empty at the time. Up till now the provincial government has taken no steps to evict the occupiers. The occupiers have given their own names to the properties. They call the Woodstock building Cissie Gool House and they have renamed the nursing home Ahmed Kathrada House. Members of Cape Town’s leading civil society organisations, such as #UniteBehind, Social Justice Coalition (SJC), Equal Education and Abahlali Base Mjondolo attended in support. The SJC’s General Secretary, Axolile Notywala, addressed the meeting and said, “We should work together and support each other. If Reclaim the City needs anything, call on the SJC and we will gladly help.” The meeting attendants were excited. There was much singing of struggle songs, such as “Asinalo uvalo [We are not scared]”.  Belinda Diedricks who was elected to Reclaim the City’s leadership smiles on stage with fellow newly elected members. Photo: Barry Christianson “We are not occupiers. We are tenants,” said a speaker, Belinda Diedericks, who lives in Woodstock and has been active in Reclaim the City. “The worst part was having little knowledge about what to do and where to go when you’ve been evicted. This campaign educates us about the law, our rights and what a legal eviction looks like.” Outside the meeting three people protested against violence against women that has allegedly occurred at one of the properties. The main purposes of the congress were to elect new leadership and adapt a constitution. Seven leaders were elected for each of the two occupied properties. A further five leaders were elected for a Woodstock chapter and a Sea Point chapter. These 24 people form the organisation’s co-ordinating committee. The leadership structures were described as “flat”, i.e. there is no hierarchy of authority at this time amongst the new leaders. Bevil Lucas, also a member of Reclaim the City, explained to the audience that the adopted Constitution was an interim one because more time was needed to get feedback on it.  Acapela group, Ikahalethu, put on a moving performance. Photo: Barry Christianson  Siphiwo Makapela reads the proposed constitution before the program begins. Photo: Barry Christianson