 About 15 residents of Overcome Heights informal settlement who survived the fire that destroyed over 300 homes and displaced 800 people last month, picketed on Friday on the corner of the M5 and Vrygrond Avenue. They were protesting that electricity and water has not been restored, a month later. Placards read: “No electricity, No water, No roads” and “Fire victims: still no water, electricity and sanitation”. Residents said electricity poles were erected at the beginning of the month but the contractors went away. “We have decided to stage a peaceful demonstration today because we understand this is the only language the City quickly understands. From our past experiences the City will never respond to emails. We have often tried to communicate our concerns through our councillor but never get feedback,” said Mike Khumalo, chairperson of Vrygrond Community Development Forum. When GroundUp visited the affected area electricians were busy installing boxes on the poles. Xabiso Somdyala, a supervisor, said, “I am expecting to install electricity in all houses by mid December.” 16 poles for electricity connection are in place. A company is busy installing pole boxes and meter boxes. Somdyala said they install 20 meter boxes a day. The communal water tap in the middle of the settlement was destroyed by fire. There are taps at the communal toilets near a sports field, but, says resident Lorna Nkothana, “There are a lot of skollies [thugs] around the sports field and it’s dangerous fetching water after dark. We have to store buckets of water for use at night.” Lona Zanele, who was also picketing, said, “Since October I have been indoors everyday around 5pm. There is no electricity and it becomes dangerous. Skollies take advantage of the dark.” Zanele uses candles at night. Since the fire she has used more than 20 candles. She says she uses nearly R30 worth of paraffin in a day. The City of Cape Town asked to be given until Monday to respond as it said officials had been sent to the site on Friday. At the time of publication (3pm Monday) a response had not been received. The article will be updated when it is received.